the joint press conference with the
Council of the District of Columbia and
Chairman Phil Mendelson is represented
here to give his briefing prior to a
council session which the council plans
to hold tomorrow following that I will
provide the regular update I'm joined
today by dr. Alejandro Nesbitt and dr.
Roger Mitchell and today we're going to
talk in some detail about the district's
cases and deaths and what they tell us
in in some detail so with that I'm going
to turn to chairman Mendelson for his
statement and his question session Thank
You mayor Bowser and good good morning
to everybody so this is we've combined
our press conferences for the ease of
everybody since it's hard to get around
in the city and so this is the press
conference that I give before
legislative meeting in tomorrow May 5th
will be another legislative meeting it's
a regular legislative meeting for the
council and I believe it's to 29th
legislative meeting of council period 23
the agenda as with the recent agendas
since since the middle of March is fair
fairly short and I apologize I don't
think I brought copies for anybody and
I'll do better next time we have a
number of contracts that are before the
council for approval for and I don't
think there's any controversy regarding
that not included in that count of for
our to local rent supplement program
contracts lrsp which relate to
affordable housing
council member Robert White had noticed
a disapproval resolution regarding a
contract with sachit X and I spoke with
him this morning he'll be withdrawing
that resolution that disapproval
resolution when we circulated the agenda
on Friday there were seven emergency
measures I'll take that back there were
nine emergency measures several of them
have been combined into one emergency
the coronavirus omnibus emergency
amendment act which is another omnibus
emergency bill that the council will be
considering tomorrow as we've done at
our previous meetings beginning at march
17th that include a number of provisions
so the eight and Oh disposition
extension is being merged into that and
the ballot access emergency legislation
has been merged into that so the only
other emergencies I believe are is a
foreclosure moratorium introduced by
councilmember Nadeau an eviction
prohibition bill introduced by
councilmember Trey on white and approval
of a collective bargaining agreement
with the University of the District of
Columbia you between UDC and the
University of the District of Columbia
faculty Association and the National and
educational stairs national educational
Association and then there are two
revenue bonds that are emergencies that
are going to be approved with regard to
the emergency the broad emergency which
is our fourth dealing with the pandemic
the virus and the the public health
emergency probably the most noteworthy
items are something like 32 sections to
the bill as a proposal for business
applying to or pertaining to business
interruption insurance where a business
has an insurance policy that includes
business interruption this legislation
would say that that business
interruption includes where business has
been closed because of mayoral order
related to the public health emergency
there also is in this legislation that
proposed 15% cap on Commission's that
third party delivery services may charge
which they charge to restaurants
restaurants are trying to eke out some
income and are finding that we're a
third party delivery is involved
that all of the restaurants profit is
being eaten up by the Commission so this
would cap the Commission at fifteen
percent similar to legislation adopted
in Seattle in San Francisco
I'm told that New York City is
considering similar legislation with a
10% cap there are also a couple of
provisions in the bill requiring payment
plans related to utilities and then I'd
mentioned that councilmember Allen had
noticed an emergency regarding elections
and in particular ballot access and
that's been merged into this bill for an
c-- commissioners the proposals that
there would be no petition signatures
required currently it's 25 for at-large
candidates this would be for the fall
ballot her fall election that the number
would be reduced from a three thousand
to two hundred and fifty I believe
there's no change with regard to the
requirement for initiatives because the
requirement is established in the home
rule Act which we cannot amend by simple
emergency legislation let me say a
little bit more about this the election
law requires the candidates to get on
the ballot have to obtain signatures on
petitions and it depends the number of
signatures depends upon the office more
for a citywide candidate than for let's
say a and C's right now the requirement
is 25 for agencies and the emergency
would get rid of that requirement
entirely for this election only and it's
because if you think about it the
petition collection process is one
that's very personal a petition
circulator has to confront a citizen
when I say confront I don't mean that in
the hostile way cancer to get right up
into within six feet and ask for their
signature and exchange Japan and a Bell
a petition clipboard and that's not so
easy to envision right now with social
distancing so because of that the
legislation proposes changes and then
there's a provision that would allow
notarization of virtually that is it
doesn't have to notarization does not
have to be in
person there are quite a number of other
provisions in the spills I said there
are 32 sections but I think those are
the ones that probably are getting the
most attention many of the provisions
are quite technical they're
clarifications for instance the
corporate filing extension which we
adopted on March 17th I believe the
language said that the there would be no
penalty for the fees or no that the fees
would be waived during the extension but
we didn't mean for late fees it's a
clarification so that that's a brief
description of that bill I think the way
we have this press conference set up
I'll take questions regarding the
legislative meeting and then the mayor
will proceed with her presentation so
are there any questions concerning the
legislative meeting yes Sophie
[Music]
no it has been considered but the access
to technology to enable that it does not
exist in the district and so for the
petition period that will start this
summer we would not be ready and that's
why it's it was considered but not it's
not going to be used yes well we're
slowly coming out of the complete
minimization if I can put it that way so
there quite a number of measures more
than where the last meeting or the last
couple of meetings I don't have a hardly
a hard line on when we go back to normal
except that it is difficult to have
markups and hearings virtually and that
is going to impede the flow of business
I neglected to mention that we've been
working out the budget process the mayor
is going to submit the budget for fiscal
year 2021 next week may 12th and she'll
also at that time we'll be submitting a
supplemental which is what we call the
revision to the current year budget the
council in last Friday's Register
published notice of our hearing
scheduled because of the need for
security with regard to remote our
virtual hearings we're limiting council
committee hearings to three hours
although some committees are combining
the three hours so it'll be a six hour
hearing and between two and four
hearings per committee so there will be
a substantially streamlined public
hearing process we are emphasizing that
comments can still be submitted in
writing and we also have given every
committee the ability for individuals to
call a phone number
and leave a3 up to three minute message
that will be transcribed so it's a way
of orally testifying that will be
transcribed into writing for each of the
committees and in that way we'll be able
to hear public input there also will be
a committee the whole hearing two days
on May 19th and 20th beginning in the
afternoon of May 19th and continuing I
think till 6:00 p.m. on May 20th so we
don't have that three hour restriction
where members of the public can testify
on any aspect of the budget but because
the hearings are virtual that means that
individuals will have to register and
then they will be given a link and then
there will be careful controls I know
with the community the whole hearings on
people being if you know I think about
the online platform technology is being
led into the waiting room and then led
into the hearing itself to testify those
procedures make it difficult and that's
why our business is still limited but I
do expect that over the next month we'll
see a continued loosening in our
processes I would say that's - well it's
twofold it's one technical concerns for
instance for the bill tomorrow it would
be very difficult to circulate
amendments tomorrow which is what
members like to do typically so things
are moved up deadlines are moved up to
today that makes it more difficult to
transact business but then also we have
not yet gone through a committee markup
processes so committees haven't marked
up so there's no legislation coming out
of committees and that reduces business
we don't have introductions from the
dais because members aren't sitting
around the dais and although we are now
tomorrow allowing some ceremonials to be
introduced
there can't be ceremonial presentations
so in all those ways the agenda is still
a constrained compared to the past yes
because if you think about it at a
meeting a member introduces a bill
circulates it among everybody and then
members are asked if they want a
co-sponsor members can still file
legislation and legislation is being
filed said Fenna
I don't know that it would increase the
cost of consumers unless consumers are
being asked to pay for the Commission
the concern here is that restaurants
which are barely surviving because of
the shutdown are struggling with a
lifeline that they can sell meals on a
carry out or delivery basis and as I
indicated what we're finding is that the
third-party delivery services are
charging Commission's that wipe out any
profit that the restaurant would receive
from that order if it if an order or
sandwich costs 10 is on the menu for ten
dollars and I go to the restaurant and I
give them ten dollars and they make $3
profit and I'm completely making up
these numbers if I go online to one of
the apps and I order I still pay $10 I
don't know anything other than that but
the restaurant only gets seven dollars
which was its cost and meanwhile the
third-party delivery service gets three
dollars well nothing against the
services but the delivery services are
making matters no better and arguably
worse for these restaurants when our
intent is to try to make it a little bit
better for the restaurants so this has
been adopted in other cities I mentioned
San Francisco in Seattle but I believe
there are more than that and it's being
considered by other cities as well
yes but then I left us out the process
would be different so instead of going
to the accounting going to the Board of
Elections and getting I remember
correctly there 20 signatures on a page
getting a hundred pages that doesn't
work right ten pages they instead would
be able to go to the board and not go to
the point they would go to the board's
website and download the form can't do
that now download the form and then sign
it and certify it and I I know the mayor
and I asked if she will have signed my
petition I don't go to her house I tell
her to go to the Board of Elections
website and she downloads the form and
she signs it and certifies that she
signed it and Mail's that in and not
only is that a much more cumbersome
process but it's also going to be hard
on the board and instead of getting 20
sheets they're gonna be getting possibly
250 sheets or more and I don't really
know whether I trusted if the mayor says
she'll sign my petition that you will
but I don't really know whether she did
or maybe she did and when she addressed
the envelope the stamp fell off and and
never got delivered so it's going to be
much more difficult process and that's
why the number has dropped
it is cumbersome that's why we're
dropping the number from 3000 to 250 my
agencies have commented on the various
proposals and I am grateful that the
council was taken the policy lead on a
lot of the issues that are emerging and
during the pandemic so we have we've
commented and I think for the most part
our comments have been acknowledged I'll
just add to that that there is still
discussion between the executive or
agencies and the my office to work out
the details of some of these provisions
so between idea there will be some
changes
I'm not sure I could give you a complete
list I believe there's still some
discussions regarding a shared work
program clarification section and I know
I don't know if this involves the
executive but there so still some
discussions regarding the payment plan
provisions for utilities the business
interruption insurance is still being
worked out those are some of the
examples
thank you are there any other questions
regarding to legislative meeting and I
will still be here if somebody thinks of
another question thank you all very much
thank you thank you chairman thank you
so we can move to the next slide to note
so I can inform you of the cases of
where we are and as I said earlier our
purpose today is to talk in some detail
about what these these numbers tell us
about the district and any additional
recommendations that we have I will be
turning to dr. Nesbitt throughout this
to lead the discussion of the medicine
so let me just show you that we're now
at just over 5,000 cases in the district
in 258 Washingtonians have succumbed on
to this disease we continue to show you
what our cases are over the last week
and remind you that one day doesn't
create a trend but we do see note that
in addition to an increase in some days
and the number of people that we see
testing positive we've also seen an
increase in the number of people being
tested and this is half after very
robust outreach over the last week to 10
days including former first lady council
members and others highlighting our free
testing sites as well as the expanded
eligibility for testing and also
symptoms that have expanded related to
kovat calls to our testing hotline in
that period of time have tripled so we
want to continue to remind people those
free testing sites and also the symptoms
that they see where we want you also to
be aware that we daily of course tracked
they tracked the experiences of our
hospitals in closely monitor hospital
usage
and here you can see our latest numbers
that there are a total of four hundred
and forty-seven people in the hospital
related to Kovac over three hundred of
them are in ICU units and ninety one of
our residents or people in the hospital
are on ventilators it is important to
note that with that number of people in
the hospital related to Kovac and people
in the hospital four other things that
we are at about 78% of our normal
Hospital capacity today and 20% of that
usage is related to Kovac so we continue
to thank our hospital providers and all
of our medical workers for all of the
the work that they're doing to support
these their patients and our and our
neighbors we also continue to know that
there is a lot of interest around the
metrics that we are following as it
relates to reopening and I just want to
remind everybody of what those metrics
are including seeing sustained decrease
in our number of cases over 14 days as
well as our Hospital capacity being able
to operate normally and the testing
criteria and contact tracing needs that
we have to make sure that we can reopen
safely and they are before you we also
know that we have even more specific
data about where we see increase rates
and doctor Nesbitt and her team I want
to talk more about that today so that we
are highlighting for all of our
residents to follow the guidelines so
that we can keep Washingtonians safe
we have been releasing cases by ward for
several weeks and we have also noticed
in our data increases of rates of
infection into neighborhoods in
particular that we want
call attention to in 16th Street Heights
in Columbia Heights and dr. Nesbit will
talk a little bit more about that words
2 & 3 continue to have the lowest rates
of infection in the city we are seeing
and I'll turn to dr. Nesbitt in a second
this slide just shows where we are with
men and women and the experience with
kovat 19 with men and women as well as
age groups where there are prevalent
numbers of infection you see there's not
much difference between male and female
reports and you also see that the age
group with the most infections are
people within the 31 to 40 year range
and on the the right you also see
infections by race and ethnicity and we
have talked and we will talk more today
about how African Americans are being
disproportionately affected by kovat 19
and we'll spend some time as well
talking about how Latinos are also being
disproportionately affected so I want to
turn to dr. Nesbitt to talk to talk
about the cases that we see sure thank
you madam mayor and I want to talk about
a little bit more today focusing on some
of the things that we are seeing in age
groups especially as pediatric cases
have become increasingly more of
interest with some of the cases that are
being noticed in young people we report
on our youth cases in a very broad
category the 0 to 18 population and I
know that some people are interested in
terms of what we are seeing across that
age distribution about 3.2 percent of
our cases as you can see are happening
in 0 to 19 year olds and about in the 0
to 4 age group is where the fewest
number of those cases are happening
we've had about 24 cases happen in
infants so individuals less than 1 so
that's the smallest group that is
impacted out of that 0 to 19 age group
and then the numbers increase or they're
more on the 15 to 19 year age group so
the 5 to 14 year olds have the small
have a small percentage of cases
compared to the 15 to 19 year olds and
the severity of illness of what we're
reading and many other publications that
happen nationally tend to be higher in
the zero-to-four age group in the 15 to
19 age group having more severe illness
some of the disparities that we see in
race and ethnicity are also occurring in
our pediatric cases of the 24 infants
who have been diagnosed you could
imagine that most of them have been
related to household contacts while we
have had 48 pregnant women in the
district who have been diagnosed or they
have been reported to the district as
pregnant women cases we have not had any
cases reported to us of a postpartum
infant being diagnosed in the district
so these cases are more than likely a
household contact is positive and then
the infant subsequently becomes positive
the disparities that we are seeing here
is nearly half of the cases of our
infants who are positive or occurring in
the hispanic and latino population so
that becomes of concern to us as we
talked about a bit last week about the
risk of household contacts being a
significant contributor to our ongoing
transmission in the district the other
thing that I want to highlight is that
we have talked a lot about the district
distribution of our cases in terms of
percentage but if we think about it in
terms of the rate per pop per 100,000
population the Hispanic Latino
population has about 1,200
cases per 100,000 in terms of the
incidence of cases so we're not talking
mortality here just the incidence of
cases about 1200 per 100,000 or as
blacks in Africa or african-americans
have 820 cases per 100,000 and whites
have 175 cases per 100,000 so the
disparities in the impact to the
Hispanic and Latino and African American
and black communities are stark in our
city and have raised again some of the
things that we need to be more attentive
around in terms of how the wards where
many of these residents live maybe
presenting some opportunities for us to
focus interventions in those particular
wards in terms of household patterns
opportunities for more interventions
opportunities for us to assist with
individuals once they are diagnosed
being isolated and they have in the
household to reduce the likelihood of
ongoing transmission so those again are
the things that we are observing as it
relates to patterns related to who gets
kovat 19 in the District of Columbia the
conversation around mortality and who is
risk for succumbing to the District of
Columbia presents a slightly different
scenario or picture and as we will
continue to highlight we don't share
this information to cause panic or to
scare people but we share this
information because we want our families
and our residents to be informed on how
they can make best choices for
themselves and their families we've
talked quite a bit about the
disproportionate impact that this virus
has online lives of black residents in
the District of Columbia and you can
continue to see that here we know that
this virus is most dangerous for older
residents as you can see there the
number of lives lost in the district
increases by age and part of that is a
function of what we also know
just in in health and community health
is that the risk of underlying
conditions tends to increase as
individuals age and so we draw
conclusions in terms of the what we call
the case fatality rate or the risk of
death for kovat 19 tends to increase as
a function of age and a function of
comorbid conditions we've talked a lot
about these underlying conditions in the
and the particular dangerous that they
create for African Americans in
particular and if you look at the chart
and the bottom right you can see exactly
what we're talking about where 71
percent of DC residents I mean sorry the
chart at the top right where the racial
and ethnic breakdown occurs and 79
percent of our lives lost in the
district have occurred in black
residents at the bottom you'll see where
the issue of underlying health
conditions becomes of concern where you
can see that 71 percent of DC residents
who have passed away due to kovat 19
have had a chronic health condition
hypertension in particular or high blood
pressure and about 50% of them have had
diabetes you will note that this chart
doesn't necessarily total to a hundred
percent because we have had a
substantial number of our residents who
have lost their lives due to kovat 19
have more than one underlying health
condition on the next slide you'll see
that when we talk about these underlying
medical conditions and the risk of
complications for severe illness being
linked to Cove at 19 we're not just
talking about high blood pressure and
diabetes or lung disease where the
infection primarily takes whole but
there are other things so people who
have chronic kidney disease or end-stage
renal disease that causes they that
causes people to need dialysis or even
to autoimmune disorders such as lupus
we've had residents in our community
lose their lives by having those types
of chronic health conditions as well
so anything that changes your health
status from being in a good state of
health and it's important to know that
when that the national studies are done
or when we are identifying people who
have lost their lives due to kovat 19
and dr. Mitchell can elaborate on this
more in the opening questions that
discussion it's not a matter of whether
or not your chronic health condition is
under control these studies are not
making a distinction between that the
medical examiners across the country are
not making a distinction between whether
or not your health condition is under
control at the time of death for many of
these individuals the presence of this
health condition alone can make your
body less able to be able to withstand
this virus if it impacts you and so we
really want people to be able to
understand that we want people to be
able to make better decisions about how
they are staying home and only going out
for essential activities and really
being cautious of the high-risk
population and whether these be members
of your own family whether they be
members of your neighbor or just someone
who may be with you when you're in the
store going out only for those essential
activities when you absolutely need to
so with that mayor I'll turn it back
over to you
Thank You laQuan sure but I don't think
that you're all the way finish okay oh
yes so we're going to talk a little bit
more about I'm seeking care but I do
think it's worth pausing if we could go
back to slide 8 on what doctor Nesbitt
has focused on about what underlying
conditions are and despite the fact that
you may be doing everything the doctor
ordered to control your condition you
need to be mindful that you are more
susceptible to very complicated
situations involving kovat 19 so please
be aware of that but also your loved
ones need to be aware of that because if
they are not strictly social distancing
they shouldn't be around you and we need
we need to be very clear about that
or they need to be reminding you that
you have to stay home too and only go
out for those essential activities so
please please play close attention to
what your body is telling you and follow
dr. Nesbitt's recommendations in the
other thing that is very it's kind of a
mixed message I think in some ways
because we've told everybody to stay
home but that doesn't mean stay home if
you need medical care not related to
kovat because we still have the same
medical conditions that we had before
the pandemic and we still have people
experiencing those conditions and they
need to stay in touch with their medical
providers so our next focus is going to
be on how to continue to take care of
your other medical conditions doctor
Nesbitt we absolutely want people to
make sure that they have everything they
need to manage their existing health
conditions but also being overall aware
of what is going on in their body
we've learned so much about what how
colvett 19 itself presents in
individuals and how the disease process
may manifest itself in different
individuals and so initially when we
first started having these conversations
we were very focused on having people
pay attention to fever cough shortness
of breath we now know that there's a
number of other symptoms that
individuals may have with kovat 19 and
for some individuals they may only have
these atypical or unusual symptoms some
people may only have headache and muscle
pain that's unrelated to exercise they
may only have the loss of taste and
smell taste or smell and so we really
want people to be very mindful to listen
to their body and reach out to their
health care provider if they have any of
these symptoms that are on this list and
to take them very seriously
we know it's the spring time we know
that some people may just be dismissing
the
simple allergies but we really want you
to speak with someone to help you make a
decision and if you are a health care
provider in our community and someone
calls on you for assistance with
assessing these symptoms we want you to
have a really low threshold for testing
them from kovat 19 and if they are
tested and you find that they need to be
isolated really helping to help them
understand that what isolation means and
reaching out to us and the government if
they need some assistance with safely
isolating so we can help reduce the
transmission within their household we
also want to make sure that parents
understand that there can be some unique
symptoms in children because children
and adults may present differently with
kovat 19 while again the fever cough
shortness of breath may be the typical
symptoms some children which are because
this is a lower respiratory infection
some children may have the typical upper
respiratory symptoms of a cold or they
may complain of sore throat and we're
even noticing that they may have what we
call GI symptoms that come with having
an upset stomach vomiting and diarrhea
may be all that they report so really be
paying attention again to any change in
your child's overall state of health
reaching out to their doctor or
healthcare provider and getting them the
attention that they need to make sure
that they stay well and that you can
help them manage through this diagnosis
thank you and we would also like to note
that Howard University Hospital is
standing up another testing site this
one located at 4-4 1-4 Benning Road
northeast Suite 2400 we will update our
testing map to include this they will be
testing their 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m.
Tuesdays and Thursdays and you can call
for an appointment at 2 0 to 8 6 5 to 1
1 9 we continue to highlight our testing
lines and as I mentioned we have seen
the call
- those lines increase over the last
week but we have capacity there and
those numbers are eight five five three
six three zero three three three as well
as eight four four seven nine six two
seven nine seven so please continue to
call to call when you have symptoms or
you've been exposed or your essential
worker or including a healthcare worker
our first responder please call for
testing and I think that dr. Nesbitt
also wants to focus on some other very
serious conditions that we want to make
sure people aren't ignoring during this
pandemic yes lastly we want to make sure
that all of our residents know that our
healthcare system is still open we are
open to take care of everyone who has an
emergency and needs the healthcare
system to be open and available to them
as the mayor mentioned our hospitals are
at about 78% capacity we have the
ability to provide emergency health
services to everyone who needs them our
9-1-1 system is available to assess
people who are in a medical emergency
our fire and ems system is available to
transport people who are having a
medical emergency and our doctors and
nurses are still available to take care
of people who are having in a medical
emergency we want to make sure that all
of our residents understand the signs
and symptoms of heart attacks and
strokes and that we will be prepared to
provide care for them during pandemics
and during emergencies in some
jurisdictions in some countries there
can be a situation where residents
become unsure of the health care systems
ability to provide emergency care we
have the ability to provide emergency
care in the district and we want to make
sure that our residents know that we're
here to take care of patients who have
kovat 19:00 and we're here to take care
of patients who have all other health
conditions as well so make sure that
residents are aware
the signs and symptoms of heart attack
and stroke and are still activating the
9-1-1 system for that we've done a great
job of training people in our community
to respond to these emergencies and we
want to make sure that we keep all of
our residents alive and well and are
still responding to emergencies and so
with that madam mayor thank you thank
you thank you dr. Nesbitt and I think a
final note we want to make sure
everybody is aware of DC health link
comm DC health link that comm so if
you've recently lost your job or lost
insurance please go to DC health link
comm for information about insurance in
the district so with that we will take
questions any questions yes Sam your
question was should I can I share my
thoughts about people being out on the
mall yes
so my thoughts are that we want people
to get fresh air and exercise and we
want them to do it close to home and I
think that way they're more assured of
knowing that they can stay six feet
apart from others obviously I think
there was a well-intentioned flyover
joint flyover from our military forces
to honor our first responders many
people could see it right from their
neighborhoods and many people did and we
would continue to remind people even if
there is some event like that which
wasn't it didn't have to be and you
didn't have to be in one place to
experience it to remember what we've
been talking about today this virus has
not left the district in fact we're
where we thought we would be in having
peak experiences during the month of May
and we need to be mindful that we can
only contain the virus if we don't
spread it to one another so all of our
guidance about staying at home
only going out for essential trips is
even it's very important to be mindful
of yes so over time we are experiencing
what we expected to experience at the
beginning of the pandemic response
because of actions taken by responsible
healthcare leadership in the district we
saw an overall decrease from our
baseline and where we operated about 79
80 % of hospital capacity down to about
65% because of the elimination of
elective procedures etc now we expect it
to trend upward as a number of cases in
our community increase the number of
people experiencing the need for
hospitalization increase the number of
people in the ICUs increased we continue
to see that upward trend correct
yes speaking hospitalizations there was
something but there are some things
planning a new reporting mechanism for a
hospital so can we compare today's
numbers to what we saw the last few
weeks on hospitalizations ICU admissions
and ventilators and can you explain more
with this new reporting mechanism s I
think I just explained the first
question I just answered that so that
I'm not sure what you're referring to
with a new reporting mechanism so
hospitals report to us there is an
electronic reporting system that we are
expecting to be able to pull data from
but it does not change the actual number
of patients who are admitted to the
hospital
so the question a lot of people is are
we Edward should are we gonna be
anywhere close to reopening or should we
expect to keep this going
through summer based on I think that
people should be careful to jump to
conclusions
but look at what the metrics are and our
daily reporting and when we see that we
are getting to where we need to be then
we're going to make announcements as
soon as possible and I would also say
and I commented to dr. Nesbitt that we
actually are our hospital capacity and
if we are successful in keeping
transmissions lower
I think our hospitals are doing an
incredible job and I have have been
below capacity throughout this pandemic
and if they are able to maintain those
levels through May that that would be
incredible but it's really up to us it's
really up to us if we're able to keep
the incidents low then we can keep those
numbers down so what if people ask us or
ask you are we any closer to being able
to reopen a good question is are we
doing everything we can to limit our
travel to essential trips and following
the guidelines and I think that's all
that's all going to be helpful now
that's not the end of the story as your
question also suggests in any reopening
scenario we would expect some some level
of more infections given increased
activity so being able to be prepared
for testing which were very focused on
in PPE which we actually are seeing and
I think I mentioned the last time
domestic and international PPE supply
lines opening up and we're feeling very
good about our local stockpile which
will support our hospitals and support
our government operations so I feel a
lot better about those acquisitions than
we have and in many weeks yes
we're seeing 102 a couple hundred cases
being reported every day are you able to
share where those cases are being
currently how those transmissions so we
do know that we have cases in congregate
settings we also know that in the past
couple of weeks that the number a couple
of the past week I would say the number
of cases in congregate settings is
decreasing which is what makes us have
the conversation with you all today
about household transmission being a
contributing factor like you have if you
have a roommate or several people in
your household and we instruct you to
isolate and not share utensils and and
not share a bathroom and you do it you
don't comply with isolation and then
everyone in your household gets infected
or as the mayor mentioned you have a
someone in your household who has high
risk and you go out every day on
non-essential activities and you bring
that risk back to that person who is
trying to comply
secret so can I ask about the 16th
Street Heights in the Columbia Heights
can you tell us why why are you sick
you know highlighted these two
neighborhoods what you're seeing there
that draws concern and is house to kind
of follow both of these household
transmission now what you believe that
number one would cause a transmission in
DC it is one of the things that we
consider to be a high area of concern
for us in addition to the congregate
settings but as congregate settings the
case is attributed to congregate
settings decreases we cannot attribute
all of the sustained number of cases and
increases we see to congregate settings
correct right so we see these cases in
high-density corridors that are not yet
that are high density mixed use
corridors where the average number of
individuals per household is higher than
the city average we also know that there
are some other characteristics of those
neighborhoods where the pop the typical
occupations in those neighborhoods are
more related to ascent the essential
work that continues to happen and there
are also some other metrics that we look
at that informs this part race or
ethnicity correct which is the
discussion we had today about the Latino
and Hispanic population and then can I
ask about long-term care facilities
you've given this great graph we
appreciate breakdown by hospital for
covet patients you've only released I
believe the data on the long-term care
facilities wants maybe twice key is
there a reason we can't get that updated
chart for the number of patients and
positive cases and so we we've done
we've done incrementally congregate
settings it's not I mean we we don't
publish all of the data that the Health
Department has I don't think any state
is doing that but we'd be happy to come
back here and do another presentation
long-term care facilities which has been
a hotbed across the country and it is
something you have released can you
release can you give us an update on
that we can give you it we can provide
you an update on it okay thank you very
much and then can I ask to us the number
and the number of cases the number of
patients who have recovered that data
that you provide every day that number
seems to have been stuck at 666 for
maybe a week or so and I'm just
wondering does that not does that number
not changes it does it does change I was
told right before we came in here that
it hadn't been updated on the website so
I'll have to get back to you as to why
you have people who are out and about
and they're going to be some people who
are
have a family or friend outing or a
cookout or that sort of thing
my my question is is that again are you
stressing to them the importance of
social distancing and what role will law
enforcement play in there
law enforcement will continue its
current role of enforcing the mayor's
order encouraging people to social
distance we will make it clear about
residential gatherings you can't have
them and with the no more than ten
applies to your home as as much as it
applies anywhere else and they're just
too many anecdotes across the nation
about family gatherings that have
literally wiped out a whole family so
inviting your family and friends over
may be one of the worst things you can
do so we I have asked the team to
provide some additional guidance on
family gatherings or events in homes but
they violate they would violate the stay
home guidance Dorothy Brazil on the line
Dorothy hi I'd like to ask a question of
mr. Mendelssohn regarding the ballot
access legislation on the agenda for
tomorrow's council hearing mr.
Mendelssohn yes Dorothy I want to make
clear that I understand something is
there going to be a separate bill that
mr. Allen is proposing or are you going
to fold it into this omnibus bill on
that you have it will be folded into the
omnibus bill there will not be a
separate bill okay
then I have a question about provisions
that were in the original Island bill
since I haven't seen the text of your
omnibus bill similar is it my
understanding that the only major
change that the legislation does is
twofold one it reduces the number of
required signatures for certain elective
offices and then it makes some changes
regarding the circulation of petitions
electronically is that correct I think
that's correct
I'd say think because you said to the
two that you mentioned are correct okay
[Music]
one of the things that I am concerned
about is that the legislation doesn't
make any other changes to candidate
qualifications for office such as having
to file the declaration of candidacy
filing but the office of campaign
finance correct that's my understanding
that that's correct
okay with regard to petitions going back
and forth between candidates and their
petition circulators for their
candidates there's an issue that would
arise as regards the degradation of the
electronic signatures on those petitions
has any thought been given to requiring
the candidate and/or the petition
circulator to retain the original copies
prior to them being transmitted
electronically so in case if there's a
challenge to the signatures that the
original copy of signature would be
available for review I'm looking at the
bill I do not see that you're quite a
reason I'm raising this is because as a
person who has on numerous occasions
reviewed petitions that have been
circulated and indeed challenged them
every time a petition sheets get its
copies or transmitted electronically I
don't care how good the machine is there
is some degradation of that signature so
I guess I'm asking whether or not
there's any stall
to getting ahead of the curve to make
sure that the original petitions are
retained by somebody whether or not it's
the candidate or the petition circulator
so that if there is in fact a challenge
to those signatures someone can go to
the original petition sheet that was
signed as opposed to an electronic copy
that has been transmitted to the
candidate I will talk with councilmember
Allen about that how that the original
must be retained okay thank you very
much thank you for that thank you if I
could mr. Mendelson I think it may bear
saying that the discussion about valid
access relates to the November election
it has nothing to do with the primary
that's coming up on June the 2nd
everybody eligible for the ballot has
secured a place on the ballot for the
June 2nd primary and similarly for the
special election for Ward 2 and so those
that primary will proceed we of course
are encouraging everyone to request a
mail-in ballot on the Board of Elections
will be sending I think actually some
people have gotten it a voter guide that
includes the request form that you can
submit to the Board of Elections you may
also download the board's app and
request a mail-in ballot now there will
also be some opportunities for in person
voting on June the 2nd at 20:00 voting
centers and that voting begins at the 20
voting centers or may the 22nd and goes
through Election Day on June the 2nd and
so there will be more information out
about the getting ballot access that was
just discussed for the November on
general election and I appreciate the
council paying attention to that ashraf
hello I would just like to ask about the
the numbers the the new infection cases
seem to be up and down a little bit but
but topping 201 point peaking over 300 I
know you'd clear closely tracking these
and testing is expanding so I had a
question for dr. Nesbit about how you
know how do you draw that line of
understanding what what are new
infections and what is the result of
just expanded testing so there's a
number of metrics and that we look at to
help inform this we look at the as you
have highlighted the total number of
tests but we also look at a test
positivity rate so you can be expanding
that at the total number of tests that
are happening and have a decrease in the
test positivity rate there was the first
time we had an expansion of testing in
the middle of April we also saw an
increased test positivity rate that went
down so you can still see that type of
variation in your testing right so
there's a number of metrics that we look
at not just the overall number of cases
okay thank you Alex
CNN Alex thank you so much for taking my
question yes I wanted that you mayor or
or director Chris Rodriguez either we're
trying to put together a timeline in
terms of how this all unfolded for the
country and I wanted to ask you when
your office when the city got the first
warning about what was happening and
happening in China and and what might be
arriving in the United States and and if
you could describe that warning and and
who it came from in the federal
government Chris this is Chris Rodriguez
thank you for the question Alex in terms
of the the time frame for when we
started looking at coronavirus or the
novel coronavirus as it was known at the
time
that would have been in December and at
that time we had had initial discussions
with our FEMA regional office region 3
which is based out of Philadelphia along
with the DC Department of Health and dr.
Nesbitt's team and the Homeland Security
and Emergency Management Agency began
meeting regularly on the novel
coronavirus
again as it was known at the time in in
late last year and who did the initial
warning come from in terms of the
initial warning I can't recall who
specifically but our initial discussions
with FEMA and with the federal health
and human services department occurred
in in December of 2019 but we can look
back in our records and get back to you
on that thank you very much yes storage
of bodies just curious
thank you for the question we we do not
autopsy all covert related deaths the
majority of covert related deaths are
diagnosed in hospitals and there's a
positive test that is performed in the
hospitals so the role of the medical
examiner in in response is for body
transport or decedent transport storage
and supporting families in to final
disposition so that we can relieve the
hospital's of having to handle that
portion of this response as it relates
to storage capability is indeed we have
had and been provided the resources to
to be prepared for a large casualty
count we hope that it doesn't get there
but we are prepared for a larger
casualty count we normally have the
capabilities of handling about 200
internally and we now have built the
capacity to handle close to a thousand
we hope that we don't get there and
we're not there but that's our that's
our abilities at this time
yes so all home related deaths all
scenes have to be called into the office
of the chief medical examiner regardless
of cause and manner my investigators who
receive these phone calls from law
enforcement who have responded to the
home ask the pertinent questions
surrounding any infection or history of
kovat related symptoms as dr. Nesbitt
has described here and if indeed there
is a suspicion then then those cases are
swab within the office of the chief
medical examiner and results are
provided within 48 24 to 48 hours
so we respond to both the scenes
regardless of it regardless of whether
or not there is a positive confirmed or
not so two questions one the two black
refrigerated trailers in front of those
they're those blue trailers are our
mobile storage units and so those are
staged in front of our office so if we
have to go and pick up large amounts of
individuals so those those aren't are
our morgues but they're used more for
transport when necessary and then you
said you have a normal capacity for 200
you've built out capacity to 1,000 can
you tell us what your current cap at
what you currently have right now bodies
and storage yes
we have currently 253 bodies and storage
both kovat and non kovat you saw the
cases today of 258 of the Kovach
positives to date families and Funeral
Homes are doing a pretty good job at
responding and picking up their loved
one and being able to move to final
disposition so about a hundred and three
individuals that are work ovid positive
have been claimed by their love
so far so total we have about 253 are
you finding that there are somebody's
people that people are not picking up
and you would then be left with the
responsibility for well that occurs on a
regular basis not as of yet not as of
yet we're making we're communicating
with families quite readily
the mayor's charged me with with
speaking to the funeral directors and
making sure that their questions are
answered and so we've we've had a pretty
good response from families and funeral
homes making that final disposition
arrangements we are having conversations
a little bit earlier with families just
to see what their arrangements would be
so that we don't come come against that
issue can you update us on the mobile
testing that was rolled out last week I
know that the mobile unit went out to
some long-term care facilities then
there were some testing units that were
placed in congregate settings do you
have any data back just on how many
tests were conducted or what results
came back from that I don't have any
data on that the Department of Forensic
Sciences is deploying a mobile unit on a
daily basis including weekends when
there is a request for it to go to these
skilled nursing facilities as well as
working with the as you know the small
devices went to the Department of
Corrections to st. Elizabeth's as well
as some of the low barrier shelter site
and Mary center and it has theirs and
they like it and as well as unity health
care as well also received some of the
one of the point-of-care instrument and
then on the half of the hospital data
that you've provided us can you tell us
how many the current hospital patients
are DC residents versus out-of-state
residents and how many of the deaths
have if we had deaths in DC hospitals
that were out of state residents
give us that number I cannot for two
reasons it is impractical in my opinion
on a daily basis to ask people who are
providing health care to very sick
people to go around and inquire about
the residency of those individuals what
we do is that once we have information
on a case we go through the clinical
record and we ascertain hospitalization
information for DC residents so on a
daily basis when we're going to present
census information for hospitals we're
not going to make a a commitment to
sorting out where those residents are
where those patients are coming from
do you know anecdotally just well on on
average hospital hospitalizations across
the region forty five percent of those
individuals come from across the region
and are not DC residents how that
applies to colvett related care we have
yet to ascertain or determine
we we know that they all are not because
that number on a daily basis out without
numbers the total number of DC residents
who have been hospitalized and this is
something that doctor Nesbitt has been
talking to you about from the beginning
when it comes to how we report Hospital
data that people come to DC for our
outstanding hospitals prepend pandemic
and we we don't know the number of cases
related to Kovac but we don't have any
reason to think that the non kovat would
be performing any differently during the
pandemic response we'll take a few more
yes
I think in director Geldart is not here
today he's been working hand in hand
with the Department of Human Services on
our strategies including more testing
including following all of the protocols
for for quarantine and if we think that
our experience is showing that we should
do other things we'll do those other
things yes so I do want to reiterate
that you know as I mentioned before in
the last five days the congregate
settings have accounted for 16 percent
of our total caseload which is down from
him in April when it was 30 percent so
that you know for contact setting when
we're talking about how we're tracking
what proportion of the congregate
setting cases are attributing to
contributing to our overall cases if
that gives you any context or indication
that what we are doing in the congregate
settings if it is working we we have
some confidence that it that those
things are starting to pay off but we we
keep an eye on our strategies to see
where we can have improvement okay thank
you thank you
[Music]